### Parallel Affine Transformation Tuning of MCMC

This directory contains all numerical experiments (i.e. data, source code and plots) belonging to the paper

Philip Schär, Michael Habeck, Daniel Rudolf  
**Parallel Affine Transformation Tuning of Markov Chain Monte Carlo**  
*Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning*,  
PMLR 235, pp. 43571-43607, 2024  

available in the [conference proceedings](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/schar24a.html). The directory `code` contains the entire code base used to run the experiments (consisting of various python modules) as well as the experiments themselves (each consisting of a Jupyter notebook). See the readme therein for details.

The directory `data` contains the data sets used in the experiments. References for where we obtained these data sets are contained in the experiment notebooks based on them.

Finally, the directory `plots` contains all plots presented in the paper as well as some additional ones that were also generated by the experiment notebooks.


### Recommended Setup for Reproduction

**Note**: The following guide presupposes working on a relatively up-to-date linux system as well as some familiarity with jupyter.

Open a terminal in the directory you want to clone this repo into, proceed by sequentially executing the following commands in it.  

1. Install pyenv:  
    `curl -fsSL https://pyenv.run | bash`
2. Use pyenv to safely install python 3.11.13 alongside whatever version the system normally uses:  
    `pyenv install 3.11.13`
3. Append your .bashrc by an alias for the new python version and restart the terminal to make the alias available:  
    `echo 'alias py311=~/.pyenv/versions/3.11.13/bin/python' >> ~/.bashrc`
    `exec $SHELL`
4. Create a venv for the PATT experiments, based on the local python 3.11 installation:  
    `py311 -m venv ~/patt_experiments_venv`
5. Clone this repo, change directory to its code/ folder:  
    `git clone git@github.com:microscopic-image-analysis/patt_mcmc.git patt_mcmc`  
    `cd patt_mcmc/code/`
6. Install the python packages required to run the experiments with the venv's pip:  
    `~/patt_experiments_venv/bin/pip install -r requirements.txt`
7. Append your .bashrc by a convenient shortcut for launching the venv's classic jupyter client, restart the terminal again:
    `echo 'alias patt_repro_nb=~/patt_experiments_venv/bin/jupyter-nbclassic' >> ~/.bashrc`
    `exec $SHELL`

After completing the above setup once, you can easily navigate and run the experiments by executing  
    `patt_repro_nb`  
in the directory `patt_mcmc/code/` to launch the venv's jupyter client.

